California Renters Legal Advocacy and Education Fund v. City of San Mateo :: 2021 :: California Courts of Appeal Decisions :: California Case Law :: California Law :: U.S. Law :: Justia (https://law.justia.com/cases/california/court-of-appeal/2021/a159320.html)
citeturn102view0 [wordlim: 200] Crawled: today; Content type: text/html; Source: open({"ref_id":"https://law.justia.com/cases/california/court-of-appeal/2021/a159320.html","lineno":null}); Total lines: 385
L0: cite0†iframe†www.googletagmanager.com L1: 
L2: cite1†Image: search†justatic.com L3: 
L4: cite2†Image: My Account†justatic.com L5: 
L6: cite3†Log In†accounts.justia.com cite4†Sign Up†accounts.justia.com L7: 
L8: [Input: Search]
L9: 
L10: cite5†Image: search†justatic.com L11: 
L12:   * cite6†Find a Lawyer†www.justia.com L13:   * cite7†Ask a Lawyer†answers.justia.com L14:   * cite8†Research the Law†www.justia.com L15:   * cite9†Law Schools†www.justia.com L16:   * cite10†Laws & Regs L17:   * cite11†Newsletters†connect.justia.com L18:   * cite12†Marketing Solutions†www.justia.com L19:     * cite13†Justia Connect†www.justia.com L20:     * cite14†Pro Membership†www.justia.com L21:     * cite15†Practice Membership†www.justia.com L22:     * cite16†Public Membership†www.justia.com L23: 
L24:     * cite17†Justia Lawyer Directory†www.justia.com L25:     * cite18†Platinum Placements†www.justia.com L26:     * cite19†Gold Placements†www.justia.com L27: 
L28:     * cite20†Justia Elevate†www.justia.com L29:     * cite21†SEO†www.justia.com L30:     * cite22†Websites†www.justia.com L31:     * cite23†Blogs†www.justia.com L32:     * cite24†Justia Amplify†www.justia.com L33:     * cite25†PPC Management†www.justia.com L34:     * cite26†Google Business Profile†www.justia.com L35:     * cite27†Social Media†www.justia.com L36: 
L37:     * cite28†Justia Onward Blog†onward.justia.com L38: # California Renters Legal Advocacy and Education Fund v. City of San Mateo (Cal. Ct. App. 2021)
L39: 
L40: Court: California Courts of Appeal
L41: 
L42: Docket Number: A159320
L43: 
L44: Date Decided: September 10, 2021
L45: 
L46: cite11†Justia Opinion Summary†connect.justia.com L47: After the City of San Mateo denied an application to build a ten-unit apartment building, petitioners sought a writ of administrative mandamus seeking to compel the project's approval.
L48: The trial court denied the petition, ruling that the project did not satisfy the City's design guidelines for multifamily homes and that, to the extent the Housing Accountability Act (HAA), Government Code section 65589.5, required the City to ignore its own guidelines, it was an unconstitutional infringement on the City's right to home rule and an unconstitutional delegation of municipal powers.
L49: The Court of Appeal reversed, concluding that the design guideline the City invoked as part of its reason for rejecting this housing development is not "objective" for purposes of the HAA, and so cannot support the City's decision to reject the project. Furthermore, because the HAA checks municipal authority only as necessary to further the statewide interest in new housing development, the HAA does not infringe on the City's right to home rule.
L50: The court rejected the City's remaining constitutional arguments. The trial court shall issue a writ of mandate directing the City to (1) vacate its February 5, 2018 action upholding the Planning Commission's decision to deny the application, and (2) reconsider the challenge to the Planning Commission's decision.
L51: Read more
L52: 
L53: Want to stay in the know about new opinions from the California Courts of Appeal?
L54: Sign up for free summaries delivered directly to your inbox. cite11†Learn More ›†connect.justia.com You already receive new opinion summaries from California Courts of Appeal. Did you know we offer summary newsletters for even more practice areas and jurisdictions? Explore them cite11†here†connect.justia.com .
L55: 
L56: cite29†Opinion cite30†Annotation L57: 
L58: cite31†Download PDF†cases.justia.com L59: cite32†iframe†cases.justia.com Filed 9/10/21 CERTIFIED FOR PUBLICATION IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA FIRST APPELLATE DISTRICT DIVISION FOUR CALIFORNIA RENTERS LEGAL ADVOCACY AND EDUCATION FUND et al., A159320, A159658 Plaintiffs and Appellants, v. (San Mateo County Super. Ct. No. 18-CIV-02105) CITY OF SAN MATEO et al., Defendants and Respondents; TONY MEHMET GUNDOGDU et al., Real Parties in Interest; ROB BONTA, as Attorney General, etc., Intervener and Respondent.
L60: “California has a housing supply and affordability crisis of historic proportions.” (Gov. Code, § 65589.5, subd. (a)(2)(A).)1 This “despite the fact that, for decades, the Legislature has enacted numerous statutes intended to significantly increase the approval, development, and affordability of housing for all income levels.” (§ 65589.5, subd. (a)(2)(J).) Among these statutes is the Housing Accountability Act (HAA) (Gov.
L61: Code, § 65589.5), enacted in 1982 with the goal of “meaningfully and effectively curbing the capability of 1 All undesignated statutory references are to the Government Code. 1 local governments to deny, reduce the density for, or render infeasible housing development projects.” (§ 65589.5, subd. (a)(2)(K).) In this, the HAA has historically failed. (Ibid.) These were the findings of the Legislature in 2017, when it amended the HAA to strengthen the statute. (Stats. 2017, ch.
L62: 378, § 1.5.) In relevant part, the HAA restricts the ability of local governments to deny an application to build housing if the proposed project complies with general plan, zoning, and design review standards that are “objective.” (§ 65589.5, subd. (j)(1).) A 2017 amendment adds teeth to this restriction by defining what it means to comply with such standards: a housing development project is deemed to comply if “substantial evidence . . . would allow a reasonable person to conclude” that it does.
L63: (§ 65589.5, subd. (f)(4) (subdivision (f)(4)).) This case raises questions about how to apply the HAA as amended and whether the statute, especially subdivision (f)(4), violates the California Constitution.
L64: After the City of San Mateo (the City) denied an application to build a ten-unit apartment building, petitioners California Renters Legal Advocacy and Education Fund, Victoria Fierce, and John Moon (collectively, CARLA) sought a writ of administrative mandamus seeking to compel the project’s approval.2 The trial court denied the petition, ruling that the project did not satisfy the City’s design guidelines for multifamily homes and that, to the extent the HAA required the City to ignore its own guidelines, it was an unconstitutional infringement on the City’s right to home rule and an unconstitutional delegation of municipal powers.
L65: The petition was also brought on behalf of San Francisco Bay Area Renters Association, which is not a party to this appeal. 2 2 We conclude otherwise. The design guideline the City invoked as part of its reason for rejecting this housing development is not “objective” for purposes of the HAA, and so cannot support the City’s decision to reject the project.
L66: And because the HAA checks municipal authority only as necessary to further the statewide interest in new housing development, the HAA does not infringe on the City’s right to home rule. Rejecting the City’s other constitutional arguments as well, we reverse. FACTUAL AND PROCEDURAL BACKGROUND Tony Gundogdu submitted an application to build a four-story, ten-unit multifamily residential building (the building or the project) in San Mateo in 2015.
L67: As proposed, the building would stretch the length of a block on North El Camino Real, bounded by El Camino Real on the east, West Santa Inez Avenue at the south, and Engle Road at the north. West Santa Inez Avenue and Engle Road are both in residential neighborhoods of single-family houses. Immediately to the west of the project are a two-story house on West Santa Inez Avenue and a single-story house on Engle Road.
L68: The project site is designated in the City’s general plan—and zoned—for high-density multifamily dwellings, “R4” Zoning. Staff to the City’s Planning Commission (the Commission) reviewed Gundogdu’s application and, after securing minor changes to the proposal, concluded it was consistent with the City’s general plan and its Multi-Family Design Guidelines (the Guidelines). Staff recommended the Commission approve the project.
L69: They reported that “[v]ariations in the roof forms help to create a transition” between the building and the single-family homes to the north and west, and that “[p]roposed landscaping helps to soften the structure and provide buffers to the adjacent single-family residences.” Alterations made at the behest of Commission staff included adding trellises 3 to facades “to create more articulation and add horizontal elements,” thus “reduc[ing] the appearance of height.” The application came before the Commission in August 2017.
L70: At the hearing, a number of City residents opposed the project, on grounds including concerns that it was out of scale with the adjacent single-family residential area. The Commission continued the hearing. Before the next hearing, planning staff again recommended approval, subject to revised conditions.
L71: The staff again proposed the Commission find the project is “in scale and harmonious with the character of the neighborhood” and “meets all applicable standards,” including that it “complies with the City’s MultiFamily Dwelling Design Guidelines.” On September 26, 2017, commissioners nonetheless expressed concern that the proposed building was out of scale with the houses in the neighborhood, and the Commission voted to disapprove the project, directing staff to prepare findings for denial.
L72: So directed, the staff next proposed findings that the project is “not in scale and . . .
L73: not harmonious with the character of the neighborhood.” The building is “too tall,” “too large and bulky for the subject site due to [its] four-story height,” and “not in keeping with the smaller one and two story dwellings in the area.” Key to this case, the proposed findings noted that on the Engle Road side there is a two-story differential between the project and adjacent single-family dwellings (ignoring the fourth story, which is stepped back).
L74: Thus, “[t]he project is not in substantial compliance with” the Guidelines’ limitations on building scale, which direct that if there is more than a one-story variation in height between adjacent buildings, “a transition or step in height is necessary,” including that a project should “step back upper floors to ease the transition.” 4 Adopting these proposed findings in full, the Commission denied the project without prejudice on October 10, 2017.
L75: The City Council considered the appeal on February 5, 2018, and upheld the Commission’s decision, also denying the application without prejudice. Appellants then brought this action seeking a writ of administrative mandamus (Code Civ. Proc., § 1094.5) on the ground the denial violated the HAA. The trial court denied the petition.
L76: Before doing so, the court asked the parties for additional briefing on a number of issues, including the following: “If either party contends that some aspect of [subdivision] (f)(4) is or is not enforceable or is or is not applicable to this action, the parties are ordered to provide all authority supporting that contention.” In response, the City argued that the HAA’s subdivision (f)(4) violates the California Constitution by infringing on the City’s right to “home rule”—or control of its own municipal affairs as a charter city—and by unlawfully delegating municipal functions to private parties, and that subdivision (f)(4) raises due process concerns because it deprives neighboring landowners of a meaningful hearing.
L77: CARLA did not address these issues, either in its briefing or at the hearing on the petition. The trial court in its ruling found that the City’s Guidelines were “ ‘applicable, objective’ ” standards for purposes of the HAA and that the project did not satisfy the Guidelines, and accordingly stated it would deny the petition for writ of mandate.
L78: Despite reaching this seemingly dispositive result, the court went on to conclude that, to the extent the HAA conflicted with “otherwise enforceable portions of the city’s Municipal Code regarding review of housing development projects,” it was unenforceable as an impermissible intrusion into the City’s municipal affairs under the home rule doctrine of the California Constitution (Cal. Const., art. XI, § 5(a)) and 5 violated the prohibition on delegation of municipal affairs to private parties (Cal.
L79: Const., art. XI, § 11(a)). With these sweeping conclusions, the court had no occasion to reach the City’s due process argument. The court later denied CARLA’s motion for a new trial, and this timely appeal ensued. Before this court, CARLA defends the constitutionality of the HAA and argues the project meets all applicable standards. Intervening, the Attorney General argues that the HAA is constitutional and that the trial court erred in deferring to the City’s interpretation of its Guidelines.
L80: (See Code Civ. Proc., §§ 664.5, subd. (e), 902.1.) The City urges us to affirm the trial court’s judgment without reaching the constitutional issues, but also contends that CARLA’s interpretation of the HAA violates the California Constitution. And numerous amici have weighed in with helpful briefs.3 DISCUSSION Because it is fundamental, we begin with a careful examination of the HAA as it operates and has evolved in the context of California’s system for approving new housing development.
L81: We then address whether the City’s denial of this project application violates the HAA; if, as the City urges, we answer that question in the negative, we need not reach the constitutional issues. (See Palermo v. Stockton Theatres, Inc.
L82: (1948) 32 Cal.2d 53, 66 [courts do not decide constitutional issues unnecessarily].) Because we In support of appellants are the Building Industry Association-Bay Area, the San Francisco Bay Area Planning and Urban Research Association, Bay Area Council, and Housing Action Coalition; Californians for Homeownership and the California Association of Realtors®; Habitat for Humanity Greater San Francisco, Inc.; and law professors Christopher S.
L83: Elmendorf, Michelle Wilder Anderson, Anika Singh Lemar, Dave Owen, Darien Shanske, and Kenneth Stahl. In support of respondents are the League of California Cities and the California State Association of Counties. 3 6 conclude that the City’s decision did violate the HAA, we go on to address the constitutionality of, and uphold, the statute. I.
L84: The Housing Accountability Act More than 50 years ago, the Legislature enacted a broad measure requiring counties and cities to “ ‘adopt a comprehensive, long-term general plan for the physical development of the county or city,’ ” with a housing element designed to promote adequate housing for the community. (California Building Industry Assn. v. City of San Jose (2015) 61 Cal.4th 435, 444 (San Jose), quoting Gov. Code., § 65300 et seq., enacted by Stats. 1965, ch.
L85: 1880, § 5.) The Legislature went further in 1980 with the Housing Element Law, which “set forth in considerable detail a municipality’s obligations to analyze and quantify the . . . locality’s share of the regional housing need as determined by the applicable regional ‘ “[c]ouncil of governments” ’ (Gov. Code., § 65582, subd.
L86: (b)), and to adopt and to submit to California’s Department of Housing and Community Development a multiyear schedule of actions the local government is undertaking to meet these needs. (Id., §§ 65583–65588.)” (San Jose, at p. 445; see Elmendorf, Beyond the Double Veto: Housing Plans as Preemptive Intergovernmental Compacts (2019) 71 Hastings L.J. 79, 100–103.) Local governments prepare housing elements, but the state’s Department of Housing and Community Development must approve them. (San Jose, at p.
L87: 445.) Since 1980, local governments have failed to approve, and developers have failed to build, housing in quantities approximating regional housing needs. As an example, a report of the Civil Grand Jury of Santa Clara County shows that of 16 jurisdictions in the county, fewer than half met their regional housing needs assessment between 2007 and 2014. (Civil Grand Jury of Santa Clara County, Affordable Housing Crisis: Density is our 7 Destiny (June 2018), p.
L88: 7.) And the California Department of Housing and Community Development reported in 2018 that for the previous ten years, California had averaged fewer than 80,000 new homes permitted annually— less than half the projected need for 180,000 homes a year. (Dept. of Housing and Community Development, California’s Housing Future: Challenges and Opportunities, Final Statewide Housing Assessment 2025 (Feb. 2018) p.
L89: 5.) A report from the California Legislative Analyst’s Office found a similar shortfall for the entire period of 1980 to 2010, and attributed it in part to community resistance to new housing, facilitated by laws allowing cities and counties to control when and where development occurs. (Legislative Analyst’s Office, California’s High Housing Costs: Causes and Consequences (Mar. 2015) pp.
L90: 15, 21.) Against this backdrop, the Legislature enacted in 1982 the HAA, colloquially known as the “Anti-NIMBY” (Not-In-My-Back-Yard) law, and it has amended the statute repeatedly in an increasing effort to compel local governments to approve more housing. (§ 65589.5, subd. (a); Ruegg &amp; Ellsworth v. City of Berkeley (2021) 63 Cal.App.5th 277, 295–297 (Ruegg); Honchariw v.
L91: County of Stanislaus (2011) 200 Cal.App.4th 1066, 1068 (Honchariw).) As originally enacted—and still generally today—the HAA provides that when a proposed housing development complies with applicable general plan, zoning, and development policies, the local agency may disapprove the project (or approve it on condition that it be developed at lower density) only if the local agency finds that the project would have a specific, adverse, and unavoidable impact on public health or safety. (Stats. 1982, ch.
L92: 1438, § 2; Honchariw, at pp. 1074–1075; § 65589.5, subd. (j)(1).) Ensuing amendments to the HAA have sought to serve and clarify the Legislature’s intent. In 1990, the Legislature made the HAA expressly 8 applicable to charter cities. (Former § 65589.5, subds. (a)(1) &amp; (2), (g); Stats. 1990, ch.
L93: 1439, § 1.) In 1999, the Legislature amended the operative language of subdivision (j) to narrow the kinds of policies that could be invoked to defeat an application, adding the italicized words: “When a proposed housing development project complies with applicable, objective general plan and zoning standards and criteria,” the project cannot be denied or reduced in density without the specified health and safety findings. (Stats. 1999, ch.
L94: 968, § 6, italics added.) A 2002 amendment clarified that the phrase “general plan and zoning standards and criteria” includes “design review standards.” (Stats. 2002, ch. 1721, § 1.) And a 2005 amendment authorized fines if a local agency denied a project in bad faith. (Former § 655589.5, subd. (l); Stats. 2005, ch.
L95: 601, § 1.) In 2016, the Legislature added an enhanced standing provision, allowing not only a person eligible for residency in a development but also a housing organization to bring an action to challenge a local agency’s disapproval of a housing development. (Former § 655589.5, subd. (k)(1) &amp; (2), Stats. 2016, ch. 420, § 1.) Still dissatisfied with the dearth of housing in this state, the Legislature in 2017 passed further amendments to the HAA, supported by detailed findings.
L96: The Legislature added a provision requiring that an applicant receive timely written notice and an explanation if an agency considers a proposed housing development inconsistent with applicable standards. (§ 65589.5, subd. (j)(1); Stats. 2017, ch. 378, § 1.5.) It heightened fines for bad faith disapproval of a project. (§ 65589.5, subd. (l); Stats. 2017, ch. 378, § 1.5.) And it increased the burden of proof required for a finding of adverse effect on public health or safety. (§ 655589.5, subd.
L97: (j)(1); Stats. 2017, ch. 378, § 1.5.) 9 Most importantly for our purposes, the Legislature added subdivision (f)(4), which provides, “For purposes of this section, a housing development project . . . shall be deemed consistent, compliant, and in conformity with an applicable plan, program, policy, ordinance, standard, requirement, or other similar provision if there is substantial evidence that would allow a reasonable person to conclude that the housing development project . . .
L98: is consistent, compliant, and in conformity.” (Stats. 2017, ch. 378, § 1.5.) Finally, the Legislature added this interpretative gloss on the statute: “It is the policy of the state that [the HAA] should be interpreted and implemented in a manner to afford the fullest possible weight to the interest of, and the approval and provision of, housing.” (§ 65589.5, subd. (a)(2)(L), Stats. 2017, ch.
L99: 378, § 1.5.) In this case, the City made no findings regarding an adverse impact on public health or safety, and no party contends this portion of the statute is relevant to our analysis. Also not at issue are separate provisions of the HAA addressing below-market-rate housing and emergency shelters. (See, e.g., § 65589.5, subds.
L100: (d), (h)(3), (k)(1)(A)(ii).) The key provision for our review is subdivision (j), which now provides that in the absence of health and safety findings a local agency may not disapprove or reduce the density of a proposed housing development that “complies with applicable, objective general plan, zoning, and subdivision standards and criteria, including design review standards, in effect at the time that the application was deemed complete.” (§ 65589.5, subd. (j)(1).) II.
L101: The City’s Rejection of the Project Violated the HAA A. Standard of Review CARLA brings this petition for administrative mandamus under Code of Civil Procedure section 1094.5, seeking to enforce the HAA. (See 10 § 65589.5, subd. (m).) Our task is therefore to determine whether the City “proceeded in the manner required by law,” with a decision supported by the findings, and findings supported by the evidence; if not, the City abused its discretion. (Code Civ. Proc., § 1094.5, subd.
L102: (b); Honchariw, supra, 200 Cal.App.4th at p. 1072.) To the extent our decision rests on factual issues, our scope of review is identical to that of the trial court. We examine the findings of the public entity itself and the relevant materials in the administrative record to determine whether the decision should be upheld, reviewing the City’s action, and not the trial court’s decision. (See Kalnel Gardens, LLC v.
L103: City of Los Angeles (2016) 3 Cal.App.5th 927, 937–938.) However, instead of asking, as is common in administrative mandamus actions, “whether the City’s findings are supported by substantial evidence” (ibid.), we inquire whether there is “substantial evidence that would allow a reasonable person to conclude that the housing development project” complies with pertinent standards. (§ 655589.5, subd.
L104: (f)(4).) As the public entity that disapproved the project, the City bears the burden of proof that its decision conformed to the HAA. (§ 65589.6.) Questions of law, including the proper interpretation of a statute, we review independently, although we may take into account an agency’s interpretation of its own rules in appropriate circumstances. (Yamaha Corp. of America v. State Bd.
L105: Of Equalization (1998) 19 Cal.4th 1, 8 (Yamaha).) Where the constitutionality of a statute is challenged, we bear in mind that “a statute, once duly enacted, ‘is presumed to be constitutional,’ ” such that any “ ‘[u]nconstitutionality must be clearly shown.’ ” (Lockyer v. City and County of San Francisco (2004) 33 Cal.4th 1055, 1086.) 11 B.
L106: General Plan and Multifamily Design Guidelines One of the goals enumerated in the housing element of the City’s general plan is to “[m]aintain the character and physical quality of residential neighborhoods.” To that end, the housing element establishes a policy of “[r]eview[ing] development proposals for conformance to the City’s multi-family design guidelines for sites located in areas that contain substantial numbers of single-family homes.” “[N]ew multi-family projects in areas having a predominance of single-family residences should be of a scale and include design features which are compatible with surrounding singlefamily homes,” the housing element directs, “while maintaining housing affordability as a major goal.” The urban design element of the general plan also notes that the City adopted the Guidelines because “the character of the neighborhood,” including the scale of its buildings, is important in a residential area.
L107: To maintain and enhance the character of residential neighborhoods, the urban design element includes a policy to “[e]nsure that new multi-family developments substantially conform to the City’s Multi-family and Small Lot Multi-family Design Guidelines. . . .” The portion of the Guidelines with which the City found the project inconsistent addresses building scale. The Guidelines provide, under the topic “Height,” as follows: “Most multi[-]family neighborhoods in San Mateo are 1 to 4 stories in height.
L108: When the changes in height are gradual, the scale is compatible and visually interesting. If height varies by more than 1 story between buildings, a transition or step in height is necessary.
L109: Any portion of a building constructed taller than surrounding structures should have the taller section built to a width that acknowledges the traditional building width pattern of the City—generally 30 to 50 feet in width.” The 12 design objectives listed for this guideline are, “Avoid changes in building height greater than one story from adjacent structures.
L110: If changes are greater, stepback upper floors to ease the transition,” and “Construct taller portions at traditional building widths, generally 30 to 50 feet wide.” (Partial italics omitted.) An accompanying illustration shows an appropriate design in which “[u]pper floors of the multi[-]family building are stepped[ ]back where adjacent to an existing building that is two stories lower.” In that illustration, no adjacent portion of the larger building is more than one story higher than the smaller existing building.
L111: An illustration of an inappropriate design shows a two-story house next to a box-like four-story multifamily building. C. Application of the HAA The pivotal question in our application of the HAA is whether the Guidelines qualify as “applicable, objective general plan, zoning, and subdivision standards and criteria, including design review standards,” which would allow the City to disapprove the project if they are not satisfied. (§ 65589.5, subd.
L112: (j)(1).) As to the portion of the Guidelines that addresses height, we conclude the Guidelines do not qualify as objective for purposes of the HAA. As an initial matter, the parties disagree on the standard of review. The City urges that the issue be treated as one of law, subject to our de novo review as an issue of statutory interpretation but with deference to the City in interpreting its own rules.
L113: CARLA urges us to apply, to legal as well as factual issues, subdivision (f)(4)’s mandate that a project is deemed consistent with applicable standards if there is substantial evidence allowing a reasonable person so to conclude. 13 We model our answer on the decision of our colleagues in Division Two of this court in Ruegg.
L114: In construing a different statute intended also to restrict local authorities’ ability to deny applications for new housing, they considered whether a project “ ‘would require the demolition of a historic structure that was placed on a national, state, or local historic register.’ ” (Ruegg, supra, 63 Cal.App.5th at p. 301, quoting § 65913.4, subd.
L115: (a)(7)(C).) This question, the Ruegg court concluded, had both a legal and a factual component: whether the type of object at issue, an ancient shellmound, was a “ ‘structure’ ” within the meaning of the statute was a question of statutory interpretation to be reviewed de novo; whether a shellmound existed on the project site was a question of fact. (Ruegg, at p.
L116: 301.) Similarly here, we conclude that whether the height standards in the Guidelines are “applicable” and “objective” for purposes of the HAA is a question of law; whether the project is consistent with those standards is one of fact, to be evaluated under the standards of subdivision (f)(4).
L117: The questions of whether the height guidelines are “applicable” and “objective” require us to discern the meaning and legal effect of the HAA and the Guidelines, so they are questions of statutory interpretation we will review independently. (Yamaha, supra, 19 Cal.4th at p. 8.) The first issue—applicability—is straight-forward.
L118: Relying on Honchariw, CARLA argues that to fall within the scope of section 65589.5 a standard must be part of a city’s “general plan, zoning, and subdivision standards and criteria.” (§ 65589.5, subd. (j); Honchariw, supra, 200 Cal.App.4th at p. 1077.) We are unpersuaded.
L119: The Guidelines, adopted in November 1994, recite that they are intended to implement multiple general plan policies, including a general plan directive to “[p]repare specific guidelines for multi[-]family development that address the preservation and 14 enhancement of neighborhood character,” including by addressing “building scale.” The applicable version of the City’s general plan, mostly recently amended in 2015, specifically refers to the Guidelines in its housing and urban design elements, effectively incorporating them by reference.
L120: In the circumstances, we conclude the Guidelines fall within the scope of “general plan . . . standards and criteria, including design review standards.” (§ 65589.5, subd. (j)(1).) CARLA fares better with its second argument, that the Guidelines do not provide objective standards for purposes of the HAA. At the time of the events at issue here, the HAA did not define the term “objective,” so we look to the ordinary meaning of that term.
L121: One dictionary defines “objective” as “expressing or dealing with facts or conditions as perceived without distortion by personal feelings, prejudices, or interpretations.” (Merriam-Webster’s Collegiate Dict. (10th ed. 2001) p. 799.) The definition added to the HAA effective January 1, 2020 is a longer version of the same idea.
L122: The HAA now defines “objective” as “involving no personal or subjective judgment by a public official and being uniformly verifiable by reference to an external and uniform benchmark or criterion available and knowable by both the development applicant or proponent and the public official.” (§ 65589.5, subd. (h)(8), added Stats. 2019, ch. 665, § 3.1.) Using either of these definitions, a standard that cannot be applied without personal interpretation or subjective judgment is not “objective” under the HAA.
L123: Further guidance is found in Honchariw, which looked at the Legislature’s purpose in adding the word “objective” to the HAA.
L124: Honchariw explains that an amendment made in 1999 to subdivision (j) of section 65589.5, replacing an earlier reference to “ ‘applicable general plan, zoning, and development policies’ ” with “ ‘applicable, objective general plan and 15 zoning standards and criteria,’ ” “appears to have been intended to strengthen the law by taking away an agency’s ability to use what might be called a ‘subjective’ development ‘policy’ (for example, ‘suitability’) to exempt a proposed housing development project from the reach of subdivision (j).” (Honchariw, supra, 200 Cal.App.4th at pp.
L125: 1076–1077.) On their face, the Guidelines’ provisions regarding the relative height of multifamily buildings and adjacent single-family houses are certainly less vague or subjective than a term such as “suitable.” But, in our view, they nevertheless require personal interpretation or subjective judgment that may vary from one situation to the next.
L126: First, the language of the Guidelines is ambiguous as to whether a proposed building must incorporate a stepback in height when a project is taller than adjacent buildings. The applicable portion of the Guidelines states that if height varies by more than one story between buildings, “a transition or step in height is necessary.” (Italics added.) One reasonable reading of this language is that a transition that is something other than a step in building height may be acceptable.
L127: Indeed, to read it otherwise would render the words “transition or” superfluous.
L128: An interpretation that allows for a transition other than one accomplished by a step in height is consistent with the City’s consultant’s assessment—which planning staff appear originally to have shared—that trees between the project and the nearest house on Engle Road and a nearby street tree would “substantially mitigate [the] height differential.” The project calls for four large trees—each depicted as almost two stories tall—to run along the property line between the project and its nearest Engle Road neighbor.
L129: Can large trees provide an adequate “transition or step in height”? Answering this question not only allows, but requires, interpretation or 16 judgment. Under the planning staff’s original interpretation of the Guidelines, the question is treated as one of design choice, which may be resolved in myriad ways depending on what form the designer views as most “compatible” with adjacent structures and “visually interesting.” A similar question arises with regard to trellises.
L130: The project includes, attached to the building along the Engle Road side, a trellis or arbor that looks to be about 10 feet wide and that creates a covered walkway alongside the building, next to the row of new trees. This trellis approximates the first floor in height, and a series of smaller trellises, each appearing to be two to three feet wide, also attaches to the building over windows at the level of the second story.

